===== TOPIC 694618 | votes=0 | comments=0 | date=2026-04-25T21:26:52.410000
TITLE: EGO-ARC: Embryonic Growth Approach (local ARC-AGI-1 sandbox, 9/50 -> 17/50)

--- [694618] OP msgid=3448538 date=2026-04-25T21:26:52.410000 votes=0
EGO-ARC: Embryonic Growth Approach (local ARC-AGI-1 sandbox, 9/50 -> 17/50)
Note for ARC-AGI-2 readers: this is a local ARC-AGI-1-style development sandbox report, not an official ARC-AGI-2 leaderboard score. The next step is porting the deterministic solver into a Kaggle ARC-AGI-2 notebook submission.
Short abstract
This post is a public research log for EGO-ARC, an experimental neuro-symbolic ARC solver built around an "embryonic growth" idea: compile each grid into objects, infer local geometric relations, generate small deterministic transformations, and score every candidate by exact-match validation on the training pairs.
The goal is not to present a finished leaderboard system. The goal is to document a reproducible engineering path: where a simple local-edit solver failed, which representations helped, which search methods did not move the ceiling, and which new DSL primitives produced measurable gains.
On a local first-50 ARC-AGI-1 development sandbox, the system improved from 9/50 exact solved tasks to 17/50 exact solved tasks. This is not an official hidden-test result and should not be read as a Kaggle leaderboard claim.
Core idea
The solver uses a deterministic pipeline:
ARC JSON -> Scene Compiler -> Schema Memory -> Object Selector -> Rule Executor -> Fitness Evaluator

The main constraint is that no rule may depend on task IDs. Candidate rules must be generated from the structure of the input/output training examples and validated on all train pairs before being used for prediction.
The most useful shift was moving from global primitives toward a two-stage process:
select a target -> execute a geometric verb

This led to a dedicated object-selection layer that proposes:

object_ids: which object or group is likely relevant.
cell_candidates: where a missing local edit may occur.
frame_candidates: which local region or crop should be transformed.

Progress table

Stage
Local first-50 exact score
Main change
Interpretation

Local-edit baseline
9/50
Basic rule executors: tiling, hole filling, color mapping, rays, simple projections
The system could solve single-verb tasks but failed on object selection and resizing.

Representation-gap baseline
12/50
Explicit selectors and early local-edit improvements
Search started to find better candidates, but the DSL was still too small.

Search experiments
12/50
Wake-Sleep, VSA-style selection, MCTS, SMT, CA, loop operators
Stronger search alone did not break the ceiling. Representation was the bottleneck.

Repeated-panel denoising
13/50
Majority-vote reconstruction over repeated panels
Added a useful abstraction for noisy repeated structures.

High-pixel closure
15/50
More precise copy/project footprint and lattice-block completion
Closed tasks that were nearly correct but missed a specific geometric verb.

Block algebra
16/50
Role-selected block extraction with D4 transforms and edge cuts
Moved toward Kaggle-style block/mask reasoning.

Block + grid abstraction
17/50
Separator-cross quadrant packing
Added a first grid-cell abstraction for tasks with explicit separators.

Three examples that moved the needle
1. 045e512c: projected footprint completion
Earlier versions often found the right local region but projected the wrong amount or used the wrong anchor. The fix was to make copy_project_footprint more object-aware:

suppress redundant single-pixel anchors when a coherent marker group exists;
score direction consistency between marker and template;
execute inside a local frame rather than across the whole grid.

Result: the task moved from partial train success to exact train success in the local benchmark.
2. 06df4c85: same-color lattice block completion
The first attempt treated aligned same-color objects as independent components. The better representation was to infer a lattice step as:
cell step = block size + separator gap

This allowed the solver to complete missing same-color blocks in a regular grid-like layout.
Result: the task closed after adding connect_aligned_same_color_block_templates.
3. 0607ce86: repeated-panel denoising
This task needed a panel-level abstraction rather than a pixel-level rule. A new denoise_repeated_panels primitive detects repeated rectangular panels, reconstructs a consensus template, and removes inconsistent noise.
Result: the system gained one solved task and confirmed that many ARC tasks become easier when the solver reasons over repeated substructures instead of raw cells.
What did not help as much as expected
Several stronger search mechanisms were tested:

Wake-Sleep-style hypothesis refinement.
Version-space style candidate filtering.
MCTS over local geometric choices.
SMT/Z3-style constrained synthesis.
Cellular automata and loop unrolling.
Budgeted LLM-generated JSON DSL suggestions.

These methods were useful as infrastructure, but they mostly plateaued until the representation itself improved. The working hypothesis is:

 ARC progress here is currently representation-limited, not search-limited.

In other words, the solver needs better words before it needs deeper search.
Three biggest current gaps
1. General grid-cell abstraction
The current solver handles one important case: a separator cross that divides the grid into four regions. Many unsolved tasks need a more general grid abstraction:

arbitrary separator rows and columns;
non-uniform cells;
output matrices based on cell occupancy, majority color, rarest color, object count, or local role;
grid-to-grid transformations rather than object-to-object transformations.

2. Object-role color algebra
The solver still needs better symbolic color roles. Instead of treating colors mostly as numeric labels or frequencies, it should infer roles such as:

background;
marker;
separator;
boundary;
fill color;
target color;
rare color;
object interior;
object outline.

This would make many local color-map misses less brittle.
3. Component movement and replacement
Several high-pixel misses appear to need "move this component", "replace this component", or "copy this component into the matching empty slot". The current DSL has partial tools for this, but not a unified movement/replacement algebra.
A promising next step is to describe transformations as:
source component -> role relation -> target frame -> paste/replace policy

Roadmap
The next technical direction is to keep the solver small and inspectable while expanding its representational vocabulary:

Build a general grid_cell_abstraction module that detects separator lattices and emits cell-level symbolic features.
Add object-role color algebra so rules can say "fill with boundary color" or "copy marker color" instead of hard-coding numeric colors.
Add component movement/replacement executors for crop, translate, paste, erase, and replace operations.
Create an error-driven primitive proposer that compares false-positive and false-negative pixels after near misses.
Use LLMs only as bounded DSL designers, not as direct solvers; every suggestion must remain JSON-schema constrained and train-validated.
Maintain evaluation hygiene: local development scores should stay clearly separated from Kaggle public/private leaderboard claims.

Reproducibility note
This is an ongoing prototype. The reported score is a local first-50 development score, not an official ARC Prize verified score. The useful part, in my view, is the engineering trace: every gain came from adding a specific representation, validating it across train pairs, and measuring whether exact-match improved.
If there is interest, I can share follow-up posts with:

screenshots of solved examples;
a minimal reproducible notebook;
the exact DSL schema;
the object selector design;
ablation results for CA/Loop/SMT/LLM modules.
